# How-Enrollment-and-Funding-Shape-Displacement-in-East-Palo-Alto
# Background and Introduction 
East Palo Alto, a city in San Mateo County, California, holds a distinct place in Bay Area history. As one of the last cities to incorporate (1983), it faced decades of underfunding, lost portions of its land to the construction of Highway 101, and grappled with high crime rates until recent years.  
Given the lack of resources, the quality of education in schools in East Palo Alto- especially the Ravenswood School District- was subpar compared to surrounding school districts. In response to a lawsuit by parents and students concerning this issue, a settlement was reached in 1985 to introduce the ‘Tinsley Volunteer Transfer Program’ wherein 135 minority students from the Ravenswood City School District would be accepted to transfer to one of the following six school districts: Las Lomitas, Menlo Park City, Palo Alto Unified, Portola Valley, San Carlos, and Woodside. 
While the Transfer Program was designed to desegregate schools and aimed to address racial disparities in education, it has also weakened local school funding and community cohesion in East Palo Alto. This is because the Ravenswood School District has lost thousands of students and suffered school closures and mergers; state funding is often allocated based on student numbers. The existence of the program may perpetuate the belief that Ravenswood schools are inferior, leading families who can afford it to move to areas with perceived better educational opportunities. This may also have the additional effect of depressing local property values, further pushing existing residents out of the area and contributing to neighborhood decline.
The issue of deprecating property values becomes paramount when we consider the Local Control Funding Formula (LCFF); introduced in 2013-14, it replaced California’s K-12 finance system to simplify school funding. It consolidated multiple funding streams into uniform grade span grants for school districts and charter schools, while county offices of education (COEs) received funding for oversight and instructional programs. LCFF funding 
comes from local property taxes and state funds through the Principal Apportionment. This means that even though LCFF was enacted to prioritize funding for disadvantaged students, displacement in East Palo Alto motivated by the Tinsley Voluntary Transfer Program and declining perceptions of education quality would reinforce these factors by affecting property taxes, and thus, school funding.  
We want to investigate this vicious cycle to understand the specific mechanisms that influence displacement risk over time in East Palo Alto.
